Course Title:	 	Exploration of Health Science Professions
Course Number: 	8400310
Course Length:	Semester

CTE Standards and Benchmarks

1. Demonstrate a well-rounded understanding of healthcare professions. – The student will be able to:
a. Explore the major scientific advancements that have contributed to the evolution of healthcare.
b. Research contributions made in the field of medical science and their impact on the health care field.
c. Identify types of education and training levels (OJT, HSTE, AA, BS/BA, MS, and Doctoral) as related to health careers.
d. Compare and contrast the health science career pathways:  Therapeutic Services, Diagnostic Services, Health Informatics, Support Services, Bio-technology Research and Development.
e. List the advantages and disadvantages of one occupation in each pathway including the following factors; job description, career pathway/area of interest, salary range, educational requirements and job outlook.
f. Research and describe a healthcare profession of interest identified through a career inventory assessment.

2. Demonstrate an understanding of the importance of legal and ethical behavior related to health care. – The student will be able to:
a. Identify responsibilities in maintaining ethical standards, confidentiality, and the patient's rights.
b. Identify and define terms related to the legal and ethical aspects of the health care industry.  For example: malpractice, negligence, invasion of privacy, quackery, ethics and law, Patients’ Bill of Rights, licensure.

3. Perform basic communication skills in the healthcare setting. – The student will be able to:
a. Demonstrate interpersonal communication skills such as active listening, verbal, non-verbal and written language in the health care setting.
b. Identify technology used for communication in healthcare professions and proper etiquette for its' use.
c. Demonstrate use of medical terminology and abbreviations associated with healthcare professions.

4. Perform basic mathematical calculations and demonstrate problem solving skills used by the health care worker. – The student will be able to:
a. Analyze case studies or current events where adverse consequences resulted from mathematical medical error.
b. Convert common weights, measure, and volumes to metric as applied in the health care setting.
c. Accurately identify and perform appropriate numeric procedures with problems found in numeric, symbolic, or word form as they relate to the occupations.
d. Accurately tell time using both standard and international/military time formats.

5. Apply scientific principles to the health care field. – The student will be able to:
a. Identify the overall organization of the human body.
b. Describe the basic structure and function of the body systems of the human body.
c. Describe how the systems of the human body work together to maintain homeostasis.
d. Describe mechanisms of disease transmission, the Chain of Infection, prevention and standard precautions.

6. Perform basic health care skills. – The student will be able to:
a. Measure and record (graph) height and weight.
b. Measure and record temperature, pulse, blood pressure and respiration while recognizing the normal ranges for each.
c. Demonstrate medical aseptic technique by hand washing, gloving and application of personal protective equipment (PPE).
d. Demonstrate basic first aid skills (i.e. bleeding, fractures, and musculoskeletal emergencies).
e. Demonstrate Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) and care for a choking victim.
f. Demonstrate basic skills used within the healthcare professions may include the following:
  * Visualizing X-rays
  * Conduct vision testing (Snellen chart, peripheral vision, color blindness)
  * Conduct basic hearing test
  * Measure respiratory capacity/output
  * Range-of-Motion exercises
  * Conduct simulated ABO blood-typing

7. Demonstrate occupational safety skills related to the employer, employee, and the patient in the healthcare setting. – The student will be able to:
a. Recognize safety concerns related to the practice of health care.
b. Demonstrate safety habits that will prevent injury to health care workers, co-workers, and patients including proper use personal protective equipment (PPE) and infection control practices.
c. Identify poisons and hazardous materials to include the use and interpretation of a Safety Data Sheet (SDS) form.
d.  Demonstrate an understanding for the importance of fire safety practices including prevention, evacuation plans (R.A.C.E.) and the use of a fire extinguisher (P.A.S.S.).
e. Explore basic information on the dangers of blood borne diseases in healthcare including but not limited to HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis B.
f. Perform proper body mechanics to prevent self and patient injuries.
