Course Number: MEA0942
Occupational Completion Point: E
 Practicum Experience – 200 Hours – SOC Code 31-9092
This “Practicum” experience is a supervised, unpaid activity of a total of 200 hours of which 160 contact hours must be in an ambulatory health care setting and no more than 40 hours in a simulated laboratory setting performing administrative and clinical procedures and must be completed prior to graduation. Students ready for the Practicum experience have completed all other program requirements and are eligible for this final phase in the program.

The program should ensure that the experience and instruction of students are meaningful and parallel in content and concept with the material presented in lecture and laboratory sessions. Sites should be selected so that each student is afforded a variety of experiences, while at the same time all students are provided consistent learning opportunities.

This experience provides an opportunity for students to utilize both administrative and clinical skills learned in the Medical Assistant classroom and clinical environment in a local clinic, physician’s office, or other health care facility.

The students Practicum should be performed in a professional environment under conditions of strict supervision and guidance of a licensed physician and clinical coordinator.  An individual who has knowledge of the medical assisting profession must provide on-site supervision of the student. When performed in the stimulated laboratory all activities must be under the supervision of the medical assisting program/practicum coordinator or faculty. The content for any simulated laboratory activity will be at the discretion of each individual learning institution to best meet the need of its students.

The actual hands-on experiences will tie-in all the educational components based on theory and competency based instruction that the student learned in the laboratory and classroom setting.

This course is set to assess the student in their ability to utilize all critical thinking applications learned during the program and to apply these critical thinking skills during the Practicum experience.  The healthcare facility and the learning college/institute will expect the student to utilize good work ethics, show excellent civic responsibilities, and further learn to both embrace and respect cultural diversity.


38.0	Perform administrative and general skills. – The student will be able to:
38.01	Understand proper and professional telephone technique.
38.02	Recognize and respond to verbal communication.
38.03	Recognize and respond to non-verbal communication.
38.04	Maintain confidentiality and adhere to HIPAA regulations.
38.05	Understand how to document manually and electronically appropriately.
38.06	Understand how to schedule appointments manually and electronically accurately.
38.07	Understand how to schedule inpatient and/or outpatient procedures accurately.
38.08	Greet patients courteously and professionally.
38.09	Demonstrate safety and quality assurance in the workplace.
39.0	Perform clinical and general skills. – The student will be able to:
39.01	Demonstrate aseptic hand washing technique.
39.02	Dispose of bio-hazardous waste in appropriate containers.
39.03	Adhere to sterilization techniques according to standards.
39.04	Practice standard precautions.
39.05	Stage patients and obtain vital signs.
39.06	Obtain patient histories.
39.07	Prepare and maintain examination and treatment area(s).
39.08	Prepare patient for examinations and/or minor office procedures.
39.09	Assist with examinations and/or minor office procedures.
39.10	Provide and document patient education.
40.0	Display professional work habits integral to medical assisting. – The student will be able to:
40.01	Communicate appropriately in healthcare settings by listening, writing, speaking and presenting with professional demeanor.
40.02	Collaborate, communicate and interact professionally with other healthcare professionals utilizing technology.
40.03	Contribute to team efforts by fulfilling responsibilities and valuing diversity.
40.04	Exercise proper judgment and critical thinking skills in decision making.
40.05	Adapt to changing organizational environments with flexibility.
40.06	Report as expected, on time, appropriately dressed and groomed and ready to work.
40.07	Model acceptable work habits as defined by company policy.
40.08	Complete and follow through on tasks using time management skills and take initiative as warranted.
40.09	Respond appropriately and quickly to patient’s needs and concerns.
40.10	Practice etiquette and social sensitivity in face to face interaction, on the telephone and the Internet.
40.11	Actively adhere to policies and procedures that protect the patient’s confidentiality and privacy.
40.12	Understand resources related to patients’ healthcare needs.

