1.0 Communication: Demonstrate methods of delivering and obtaining information, while communicating effectively.
1.1 Concepts of Effective Communication
1.1.1 Model verbal and nonverbal therapeutic communication: Active listening, Reflecting, Silence, Summarizing,
1.1.2.1 Physical disabilities: Aphasia, Developmental level, Hearing loss, Impaired vision,
1.1.2.2 Psychological barriers: Attitudes, Bias, Prejudice, Stereotyping,
1.1.2.3 Language barriers
1.1.3 Distinguish between subjective and objective information.
1.1.4 Interpret elements of communication using sender-message-receiver feedback model.
1.1.5 Modify communication to meet the needs of the patient/client and be appropriate to the situation.
1.1.6 Describe appropriate interactions with patients throughout various stages of psychosocial development.
1.2 Medical Terminology
1.2.1 Interpret common medical abbreviations to communicate information specific to course content.
2.0 Teamwork: Identify roles and responsibilities of individual members as part of the healthcare team.
2.1 Evaluate roles and responsibilities of healthcare team members.
2.2 Identify characteristics of effective teams: Collaboration, Defined roles, Effective communication, Effective leadership, Measurable processes and outcomes, Mutual respect, Shared goals,
2.3 Team Member Participation
2.3.1 Recognize methods for building positive team relationships.
2.3.2 Analyze attributes and attitudes of an effective leader.
2.3.2.1 Characteristics:Focused and driven,Interpersonal skills,Motivates and inspires,Organized and balanced,
2.3.2.2 Types:Autocratic,Democratic,Laissez faire,
2.3.2.3 Roles: Communicates vision, Leads change, Manages accountability,
2.3.4 Apply effective techniques for managing team conflict: Communicate assertively, Gather the facts, Mediate disputes, Negotiate resolutions, Set clear expectations,
2.3.5 Evaluate why teamwork is an important part of healthcare and how it improves patient care.
3.0 Health Maintenance Practices: Differentiate between wellness and disease. Promote disease prevention and model healthy behaviors.
3.1 Healthy Behaviors
3.1.1 Promote self-care behaviors of health and wellness: Exercise, Nutrition, Relationships, Sleep habits, Stress management, Weight control,
3.1.2 Examine various aspects of behavioral health: Anxiety Depression Substance abuse Suicide
3.1.3 Describe public health strategies for prevention of disease: Community health education outreach programs, Immunizations, Medical, dental, and mental health screenings, Routine physical exams, Self-care behaviors,
3.1.4 Investigate complementary and alternative health practices as they relate to wellness and disease prevention: Eastern medicine, Holistic medicine, Homeopathic medicine, Manipulative medicine,
3.2 Healthcare Across the Lifespan
3.2.1 Discuss physical, mental, social and behavioral development and its impact on healthcare.
3.2.2 Identify socioeconomic determinants of health and wellness.
4.0 Safety Practices:  Identify existing and potential hazards to clients, co-workers, and self. Employ safe work practices and follow health and safety policies and procedures to prevent injury and illness.
4.1 Infection Control
4.1.1 Explain principles of infection transmission.
4.1.1.1 Identify classifications of pathogens: Bacteria, Fungi, Parasites, Protozoa, Viruses,
4.1.1.2 Describe characteristics of microorganisms: Aerobic, Anaerobic, Non-pathogenic,
a. Pathogenic
4.1.1.3 Recognize chain of infection
4.1.1.4 Describe mode of transmission: Common vehicle (air, food, water), Direct, Healthcare-associated infections (nosocomial), Indirect, Opportunistic, Vectors,
4.1.2 Differentiate methods of controlling the spread and growth of pathogens.
4.1.2.1 Asepsis: Antisepsis, Disinfection, Sanitization, Sterile technique, Sterilization,
4.1.1.2 Standard precautions: Environmental cleaning, Handwashing, Gloving, Personal Protective Equipment (PPE),
4.1.2.3 Isolation precautions: Transmission-based contact
4.1.2.4 Bloodborne pathogen precautions
4.1.2.5 Vaccinations
4.2 Personal Safety
4.2.1 Apply personal safety procedures based on Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Centers for Disease Control (CDC) regulations.
4.2.2 Demonstrate principles of body mechanics during patient care:  Ambulating, Lifting, Positioning,
4.2.3 Demonstrate and apply the use of personal protective equipment (PPE).
4.3 Environmental Safety
4.3.1 Apply safety techniques in the work environment: Ergonomics, Patient/client/employee safety measures, Safe operation of equipment,
4.4 Common Safety Hazards
4.4.1 Observe all safety standards related to the occupational exposure to hazardous chemicals standard (safety data sheets [SDS]).
4.4.2 Comply with safety signs, symbols, and labels.
4.5 Emergency Procedures and Protocols
4.5.1 Practice fire safety in a healthcare setting.
4.5.2 Apply principles of basic emergency response in natural disasters and other emergencies (safe location, contact emergency personnel, follow facility protocols).
5.0 Technical Skills:  Apply technical skills required for all career specialties and demonstrate skills and knowledge as appropriate.
5.1 Obtain training or certification in: Automated external defibrillator (AED), Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), First aid, Foreign body airway obstruction (FBAO),
6.0 Employability Skills:  Utilize employability skills to enhance employment opportunities and job satisfaction.
6.1 Personal Traits of the Health Professional
6.1.1 Identify personal traits and attitudes desirable in a career ready member of a health team: Acceptance of criticism, Competence, Dependability, Discretion, Empathy, Enthusiasm, Honesty, Initiative, Integrity, Patience, Positive Attitude, Responsibility, Self-motivation, Social and cultural competence, Tact, Team player, Willingness to learn,
6.1.2 Summarize professional standards as they apply to hygiene, dress, language, confidentiality and behavior.
6.2 Employability Skills
6.2.1 Apply employability skills in healthcare: Chain of command, Communication skills, Customer service, Decision making, Flexible, Organization, Problem solving, Scope of practice, Time management, Work ethic,
6.3 Career Decision-making
6.3.1 Research levels of education, credentialing requirements, and employment trends in health professions.
6.3.2 Distinguish differences among careers within a health science pathway: Biotechnology research and development, Diagnostic services, Health informatics, Support services, Therapeutic services,
6.4 Employability Preparation
6.4.1 Develop components of a personal portfolio: Community Service / Service Learning, Credentials, Leadership examples, Mock interview, Oral report, Personal statement, Professional/student organization memberships, Resume, Sample projects, Technology skills, Work-based learning documentation, Writing sample,
6.4.2 Identify strategies for pursuing employment. Employer websites, Internships, Personal networking, Social media,