Foundation Standard 1: Academic Foundation - Identify trends and changes in the healthcare industry. Understand basic medical terminology and mathematical calculations as they correspond to the healthcare field.
1. Describe healthcare history and medical advances.
2. Identify components and solve computations of the metric and household systems of measure.
3. Calculate mathematical conversions related to healthcare such as height, weight/mass, length, volume, temperature, and household measurements.
4. Demonstrate recording time using 24-hour clock/military time.
5. Recognize and convert traditional numbers to roman numerals.
6. Define and recognize entry level Medical Terminology and terms related to healthcare.

Foundation Standard 2: Communications - Demonstrate methods of delivering and obtaining information, while communicating effectively.
1. Interpret and model verbal and nonverbal communication.
2. Recognize and interpret elements of communication using a sender-receiver- messagefeedback model.
3. Apply and practice speaking and active listening skills.
4. Use proper elements of written and electronic communication (spelling, grammar, and formatting).
5. Prepare examples of technical and informative writing.
6. Demonstrate appropriate use of digital communication in a work environment, such as email, text, and social media.
7. Use appropriate medical terminology to communicate information in both oral and written forms utilizing common root prefixes and suffixes to communicate.

Foundation Standard 3: Systems -  Identify how key systems affect services performed and quality of care. Identify and compare healthcare delivery systems (public, private, government, and related organizations).
1. Types of practice settings
  a. Acute care
  b. Ambulatory care
  c. Behavioral and mental health services
  d. Home care
  e. Long-term care
  f. Medical and dental practices
2. Specialty medical and dental practices
  a. Cosmetic surgery
  b. Pulmonology
  c. Surgical
  d. Orthodontics
3. Government
  a. Veterans Administration (VA)
  b. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
  c. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
  d. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
  e. Public Health Services (PHS)
4. Related organizations
  a. American Cancer Society
  b. American Heart Association (AHA)
  c. American Red Cross (ARC)
  d. March of Dimes
  e. World Health Organization (WHO)
5. Identify the importance of an organizational structure in health care.

Foundation Standard 4: Employability Skills - Use employability skills to enhance employment opportunities and job satisfaction.
1. Identify employability skills as a career ready member of the healthcare team
  a. Acceptance of criticism
  b. Competence
  c. Dependability
  d. Discretion
  e. Empathy
  f. Enthusiasm
  g. Honesty
  h. Initiative
  i. Patience
  j. Responsibility
  k. Self-motivation
  l. Tact
  m. Team player
  n. Willingness to learn
2. Apply employability skills as a member of the healthcare team.
  a. Chain of command
  b. Communication Skills
  c. Correct grammar
  d. Decision making
  e. Flexibility
  f. Initiative
  g. Loyalty
  h. Organization
  i. Positive attitude
  j. Problem Solving
  k. Professional characteristics
  l. Promptness and preparedness
  m. Responsibility
  n. Scope of practice
  o. Teamwork
  p. Time Management
  q. Willingness to learn
  r. Work Ethic
3. Summarize and demonstrate professional standards and characteristics as they apply to hygiene, dress, language, confidentiality and behavior.
4. Compare careers within the health science career pathways (diagnostic services, therapeutic services, health informatics, support services, or biotechnology research and development).
5. Research and evaluate levels of education, credentialing requirements, employment trends in health professions (opportunities, workplace environments and career earnings etc.).
6. Initiate development of components of a personal portfolio (healthcare project, writing sample, work-based learning, oral presentation, service learning, credentials, technology, and leadership experience).
7. Demonstrate professional and leadership skills by actively participating in learning experiences through HOSA Future Health Professionals, student organization (either as a member or as a participant in some of their sponsored activities).

Foundation Standard 6: Ethics - Understand accepted ethical practices with respect to cultural, social, and ethnic differences within the healthcare environment.
1. Identify and discuss religious and cultural values as they impact healthcare (such as; ethnicity, race, religion, gender) and demonstrate respectful and empathetic interactions and treatment of all patients/clients within a diverse population (such as: customer service, patient satisfaction, civility).

Foundation Standard 7: Safety Practices
Identify existing and potential hazards to clients, co-workers, and self. Employ safe work practices and follow health and safety policies and procedures to prevent injury and illness.
1. Infection Control
a. Explain principles of infection transmission: Identify classifications of pathogens; Bacteria; Fungi; Parasites; Protozoa; Viruses
b. Describe characteristics of microorganisms; Aerobic; Anaerobic; Non-pathogenic; Pathogenic
c. Recognize chain of infection
d. Discuss and Demonstrate methods of controlling the spread and growth of pathogens.:  Standard precautions (discuss);  Handwashing (demonstrate);  Gloving (demonstrate);  Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) (discuss);  Environmental cleaning (discuss);
b. Personal Safety
a. Apply personal safety procedures based on Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Centers for Disease Control (CDC) regulations.
b. Demonstrate and apply the use of personal protective equipment (PPE).
c. Environmental Safety
a. Apply safety techniques in the work environment: Ergonomics; Safe operation of equipment; Patient/client/employee safety measures
d. Common Safety Hazards
a. Observe all safety standards related to occupational exposure to hazardous chemicals standard (safety data sheets [SDS]).
b. Comply with safety signs, symbols, and labels.
e. Emergency Procedures and Protocols
a. Practice fire safety in a healthcare setting.
b. Apply principles of basic emergency response in natural disasters and other emergencies (safe location, contact emergency personnel, follow facility protocols).

Foundation Standard 8: Teamwork - Identify roles and responsibilities of individual members as part of the healthcare team
1. Explain and Evaluate roles and responsibilities of team members.
a. Examples of healthcare teams
b. Responsibilities of team members
c. Benefits of teamwork
2. Respect interdisciplinary roles of team members and act responsibly as a team member.
3. Recognize characteristics of effective teams and methods for building positive team relationships.
a. Defined roles
b. Common purpose
c. Effective communication
d. Effective leadership
e. Measurable processes and outcomes
f. Mutual respect
g. Shared goals
4. Collaborate with others to formulate team objectives.

5. Explore and analyze attributes and attitudes of an effective leader:
a. Characteristics (interpersonal skills, focused on results, positive)
b. Types (autocratic, democratic, laissez faire)
c. Roles (sets vision, leads change, manages accountability)
6. Apply techniques for managing team conflict (negotiation, assertive communication, gather the facts, clear expectations, mediation). Recognize methods for building positive team relationships (such as: mentorships and teambuilding).

Foundation Standard 9: Health Maintenance Practices - Differentiate between wellness and disease. Promote disease prevention and model healthy behaviors.
1. Apply behaviors that promote health and wellness.
a. Promote behaviors of health and wellness: Exercise;  Nutrition;  Relationships;  Sleep habits;  Stress management;  Weight control;
b. Examine various aspects of behavioral health:  Anxiety;  Depression;  Substance abuse;  Suicide;
2. Describe strategies for prevention of diseases.
a. Community health education outreach programs
b. Immunizations
c. Medical, dental, and mental health screenings
d. Routine physical exams
e. Stress management
3. Investigate complementary and alternative health practices as they relate to wellness and disease such as:
a. Acupuncture
b. Eastern medicine
c. Holistic medicine
d. Homeopathy
e. Manipulative therapies
f. Natural therapies

Foundation Standard 10: Technical Skills -  Apply and demonstrate technical skills and knowledge common to health career specialties.
1. Explore procedures for measuring and recording vital signs including the normal ranges.
a. Blood pressure
b. Temperature
c. Oxygen saturation
d. Pain
e. Pulse
f. Respirations
g. Snellen chart.

2. Introduction to CPR/first aid procedures and Stop The Bleed Training. (Certification optional in Health Science 1)

Foundation Standard 11: Information Technology Applications - Apply information technology practices common across health professions.
1. Communicate using technology (fax, e-mail, and Internet) to access and distribute data and other information (including assignments and online assessments).
2. Demonstrate appropriate usage of email and social media in a work environment (such as: work- related communications, personal texting on own time, appropriate language and content, use full language sentences
3. Recognize technology applications and key technology principles used in healthcare.
4. Adhere to information systems policies, procedures, and regulations as required by national, state, and local entities.
5. Evaluate the validity of web-based resources.

