Explore the major scientific advancements that have contributed to the evolution of healthcare.
Research contributions made in the field of medical science and their impact on the health care field.
Identify types of education and training levels (OJT, HSTE, AA, BS/BA, MS, and Doctoral) as related to health careers.
Compare and contrast the health science career pathways:  Therapeutic Services, Diagnostic Services, Health Informatics, Support Services, Bio-technology Research and Development.
List the advantages and disadvantages of one occupation in each pathway including the following factors; job description, career pathway/area of interest, salary range, educational requirements and job outlook.
Research and describe a healthcare profession of interest identified through a career inventory assessment.
Identify responsibilities in maintaining ethical standards, confidentiality, and the patient's rights.
Identify and define terms related to the legal and ethical aspects of the health care industry.  For example: malpractice, negligence, invasion of privacy, quackery, ethics and law, Patients’ Bill of Rights, licensure.
Demonstrate interpersonal communication skills such as active listening, verbal, non-verbal and written language in the health care setting.
Identify technology used for communication in healthcare professions and proper etiquette for its' use.
Demonstrate use of medical terminology and abbreviations associated with healthcare professions.
Analyze case studies or current events where adverse consequences resulted from mathematical medical error.
Convert common weights, measure, and volumes to metric as applied in the health care setting.
Accurately identify and perform appropriate numeric procedures with problems found in numeric, symbolic, or word form as they relate to the occupations.
Accurately tell time using both standard and international/military time formats.
Identify the overall organization of the human body.
Describe the basic structure and function of the body systems of the human body.
Describe how the systems of the human body work together to maintain homeostasis.
Describe mechanisms of disease transmission, the Chain of Infection, prevention and standard precautions.
Measure and record (graph) height and weight.
Measure and record temperature, pulse, blood pressure and respiration while recognizing the normal ranges for each.
Demonstrate medical aseptic technique by hand washing, gloving and application of personal protective equipment (PPE).
Demonstrate basic first aid skills (i.e. bleeding, fractures, and musculoskeletal emergencies).
Demonstrate Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) and care for a choking victim.
Demonstrate basic skills used within the healthcare professions may include the following: Visualizing X-rays, Conduct vision testing (Snellen chart, peripheral vision, color blindness), Conduct basic hearing test, Measure respiratory capacity/output, Range-of-Motion exercises, Conduct simulated ABO blood-typing.
Recognize safety concerns related to the practice of health care.
Demonstrate safety habits that will prevent injury to health care workers, co-workers, and patients including proper use personal protective equipment (PPE) and infection control practices.
Identify poisons and hazardous materials to include the use and interpretation of a Safety Data Sheet (SDS) form.
Demonstrate an understanding for the importance of fire safety practices including prevention, evacuation plans (R.A.C.E.) and the use of a fire extinguisher (P.A.S.S.).
Explore basic information on the dangers of blood borne diseases in healthcare including but not limited to HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis B.
Perform proper body mechanics to prevent self and patient injuries.
Identify the basic components of the healthcare delivery system including public, private, government and non-profit.
Recognize factors and situations that may lead to conflict.
Recognize effective techniques for managing team conflict.
Describe factors that influence the current delivery system of healthcare.
Explain the impact of emerging issues including technology, epidemiology, bioethics and socioeconomics on healthcare delivery systems.
Identify common methods of payment for healthcare services.
Describe the various types of healthcare providers and the range of services available including resources to victims of domestic violence.
Describe the composition and functions of a healthcare team.
Identify the general roles and responsibilities of the individual members of the healthcare team.
Identify the roles and responsibilities of the consumer within the healthcare delivery system.
Identify characteristics of effective teams.
Recognize methods for building positive team relationships.
Discuss attributes and attitudes of an effective leader.
Recognize emerging diseases and disorders.
Distinguish between fact and fallacy about the transmission and treatment of diseases caused by blood borne pathogens.
Identify community resources and services available to the individuals with diseases caused by blood borne pathogens.
Identify at risk" behaviors which promote the spread of diseases caused by blood borne pathogens and the public education necessary to combat the spread of these diseases."
Explain infection control techniques designed to prevent the spread of diseases caused by blood borne pathogens to the care of all patients following Centers for Disease Control (CDC) guidelines.
Explain the legal aspects of HIV/AIDS, including testing.
Draw, read, and report on graphs, charts, and tables.
Measure time, temperature, distance, capacity, and mass/weight.
Make, use and convert using both traditional and metric units.
Make estimations and approximations and judge the reasonableness of the result.
Convert from regular to 24 hour time.
Demonstrate ability to evaluate and draw conclusions.
Organize and communicate the results obtained by observation and experimentation.
Ask appropriate scientific questions and recognize what is involved in experimental approaches to the solution of such questions.
Calculate ratios.
Develop basic speaking and active listening skills.
Distinguish between and report subjective and objective information.
Report relevant information in order of occurrence.
Develop basic observational skills and related documentation strategies in written and oral form.
Identify characteristics of successful and unsuccessful communication including communication styles and barriers.
Identify characteristics of verbal and non-verbal cues.
Use appropriate medical terminology and abbreviations.
Discuss the importance of courtesy and respect for patients and other healthcare workers and maintain good interpersonal relationships.
Explain the importance of patient/client educations regarding healthcare.
Adapt communication skills to varied levels of understanding and cultural orientation including diverse age, cultural, economic, ethnic, and religious groups.
Discuss elements of communication using a sender-receiver model.
Explain the legal framework of the healthcare occupations including scope of practice legislation.
Differentiate between legal and ethical issues in healthcare.
Describe a code of ethics consistent with the healthcare occupation.
Identify and compare personal, professional, and organizational ethics.
Discuss the limits of authority and responsibility of health care workers including legislated scope of practice.
Recognize and report illegal and/or unethical practices of healthcare workers.
Recognize and report abuse including domestic violence, neglect and suspected human trafficking.
Distinguish between the five schedules of controlled substances.
Explain practices that could result in malpractice, liability, negligence, abandonment, false imprisonment and fraud.
Explain procedures for accurate documentation and record keeping.
Explain the importance of healthcare facility policy and procedures for employees.
Explain the “Patient’s Bill of Rights”.
Identify and explain standards of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
Describe advance directives.
Describe informed consent.
Explain the laws governing harassment, labor and employment.
Describe strategies for prevention of diseases including health screenings and examinations.
Identify personal health practices and environmental factors which affect optimal function of each of the major body systems.
Identify psychological reactions to illness including defense mechanisms.
Identify complementary and alternative health practices.
Discuss the adverse effects of the use of alcohol, tobacco, and both legal and illegal drugs on the human body and apply safety practices related to these and other high risk behaviors.
Explain the basic concepts of positive self-image, wellness and stress.
Develop a wellness and stress control plan that can be used in personal and professional life.
Explore and utilize the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s nutrition resources.
Discuss the steps in the grief process.
Recognize safe and unsafe working conditions and report safety hazards.
Explain procedures for the safe transport and transfer of patients.
Recognize fire, safety, disaster and evacuations procedures.
Discuss The Joint commission patient safety goals (www.jointcommission.org ) and any other applicable accrediting/regulatory agency guidelines.
Explain why understanding how to safely use medical equipment is important.
Explain and apply the theory of root- cause analysis.
Identify and describe methods in medical error reduction and prevention in the various healthcare settings.
Identify and practice security procedures for medical supplies and equipment.
Explain personal safety procedures based on Occupations Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Centers for Disease Control (CDC) regulations including standard precautions.
Recognize Safety Data Sheets and comply with safety signs, symbols, and labels.
Explain proper body mechanics and ergonomics.
Explain the procedure for properly identifying patients.
Record and monitor vital signs accurately.
Describe legal parameters relating to the administration of emergency care.
Obtain and maintain training for certification on cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), automated external defibrillator (AED), foreign body airway obstruction (FBAO), and first aid.
Recognize adverse drug related emergencies and take appropriate first aid action.
Define principles of infection control including standard and transmission based precautions.
Explain medical asepsis and practice procedures such as hand-washing and isolation.
Explain surgical asepsis.
Describe how to dispose correctly of biohazardous materials according to appropriate government guidelines such as OSHA.
Describe technology applications in healthcare.
Define terms and demonstrate basic computer skills.
Recognize technology applications in healthcare.
Interpret information from electronic medical documents.
Identify methods of communication to access and distribute data such as fax, e-mail, and internet.
Identify personal traits or attitudes desirable in a member of the healthcare team.
Compare careers within the health science career pathways (diagnostic services, therapeutic services, health informatics, support services and biotechnology research and development).
Exemplify basic professional standards of healthcare workers as they apply to hygiene, dress, language, confidentiality, and behavior (i.e. telephone etiquette, courtesy and self-introductions).
Identify documents that may be required when applying for a job.
Write an appropriate resume.
Conduct a job search.
Complete a job application form correctly.
Examine levels of education, credentialing requirements including licensure and certification, employment opportunities, workplace environments, and career growth potential.
Identify acceptable work habits.
Recognize appropriate affective/professional behavior.
Communication: Demonstrate methods of delivering and obtaining information, while communicating effectively.
Concepts of Effective Communication
Model verbal and nonverbal therapeutic communication: Active listening, Reflecting, Silence, Summarizing,
Physical disabilities: Aphasia, Developmental level, Hearing loss, Impaired vision,
Psychological barriers: Attitudes, Bias, Prejudice, Stereotyping,
Language barriers
Distinguish between subjective and objective information.
Interpret elements of communication using sender-message-receiver feedback model.
Modify communication to meet the needs of the patient/client and be appropriate to the situation.
Describe appropriate interactions with patients throughout various stages of psychosocial development.
Medical Terminology
Interpret common medical abbreviations to communicate information specific to course content.
Teamwork: Identify roles and responsibilities of individual members as part of the healthcare team.
Evaluate roles and responsibilities of healthcare team members.
Identify characteristics of effective teams: Collaboration, Defined roles, Effective communication, Effective leadership, Measurable processes and outcomes, Mutual respect, Shared goals,
Team Member Participation
Recognize methods for building positive team relationships.
Analyze attributes and attitudes of an effective leader.
Characteristics:Focused and driven,Interpersonal skills,Motivates and inspires,Organized and balanced,
Types:Autocratic,Democratic,Laissez faire,
Roles: Communicates vision, Leads change, Manages accountability,
Apply effective techniques for managing team conflict: Communicate assertively, Gather the facts, Mediate disputes, Negotiate resolutions, Set clear expectations,
Evaluate why teamwork is an important part of healthcare and how it improves patient care.
Health Maintenance Practices: Differentiate between wellness and disease. Promote disease prevention and model healthy behaviors.
Healthy Behaviors
Promote self-care behaviors of health and wellness: Exercise, Nutrition, Relationships, Sleep habits, Stress management, Weight control,
Examine various aspects of behavioral health: Anxiety Depression Substance abuse Suicide
Describe public health strategies for prevention of disease: Community health education outreach programs, Immunizations, Medical, dental, and mental health screenings, Routine physical exams, Self-care behaviors,
Investigate complementary and alternative health practices as they relate to wellness and disease prevention: Eastern medicine, Holistic medicine, Homeopathic medicine, Manipulative medicine,
Healthcare Across the Lifespan
Discuss physical, mental, social and behavioral development and its impact on healthcare.
Identify socioeconomic determinants of health and wellness.
Safety Practices: Identify existing and potential hazards to clients, co-workers, and self. Employ safe work practices and follow health and safety policies and procedures to prevent injury and illness.
Infection Control
Explain principles of infection transmission.
Identify classifications of pathogens: Bacteria, Fungi, Parasites, Protozoa, Viruses,
Standard precautions: Environmental cleaning, Handwashing, Gloving, Personal Protective Equipment (PPE),
Recognize chain of infection
Describe mode of transmission: Common vehicle (air, food, water), Direct, Healthcare-associated infections (nosocomial), Indirect, Opportunistic, Vectors,
Differentiate methods of controlling the spread and growth of pathogens.
Asepsis: Antisepsis, Disinfection, Sanitization, Sterile technique, Sterilization,
Isolation precautions: Transmission-based contact
Bloodborne pathogen precautions
Vaccinations
Personal Safety
Apply personal safety procedures based on Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Centers for Disease Control (CDC) regulations.
Demonstrate principles of body mechanics during patient care: Ambulating, Lifting, Positioning,
Demonstrate and apply the use of personal protective equipment (PPE).
Environmental Safety
Apply safety techniques in the work environment: Ergonomics, Patient/client/employee safety measures, Safe operation of equipment,
Common Safety Hazards
Observe all safety standards related to the occupational exposure to hazardous chemicals standard (safety data sheets [SDS]).
Comply with safety signs, symbols, and labels.
Emergency Procedures and Protocols
Practice fire safety in a healthcare setting.
Apply principles of basic emergency response in natural disasters and other emergencies (safe location, contact emergency personnel, follow facility protocols).
Technical Skills: Apply technical skills required for all career specialties and demonstrate skills and knowledge as appropriate.
Obtain training or certification in: Automated external defibrillator (AED), Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), First aid, Foreign body airway obstruction (FBAO),
Employability Skills: Utilize employability skills to enhance employment opportunities and job satisfaction.
Personal Traits of the Health Professional
Identify personal traits and attitudes desirable in a career ready member of a health team: Acceptance of criticism, Competence, Dependability, Discretion, Empathy, Enthusiasm, Honesty, Initiative, Integrity, Patience, Positive Attitude, Responsibility, Self-motivation, Social and cultural competence, Tact, Team player, Willingness to learn,
Summarize professional standards as they apply to hygiene, dress, language, confidentiality and behavior.
Employability Skills
Apply employability skills in healthcare: Chain of command, Communication skills, Customer service, Decision making, Flexible, Organization, Problem solving, Scope of practice, Time management, Work ethic,
Career Decision-making
Research levels of education, credentialing requirements, and employment trends in health professions.
Distinguish differences among careers within a health science pathway: Biotechnology research and development, Diagnostic services, Health informatics, Support services, Therapeutic services,
Employability Preparation
Develop components of a personal portfolio: Community Service / Service Learning, Credentials, Leadership examples, Mock interview, Oral report, Personal statement, Professional/student organization memberships, Resume, Sample projects, Technology skills, Work-based learning documentation, Writing sample,
Identify strategies for pursuing employment. Employer websites, Internships, Personal networking, Social media,
The student demonstrates professional standards/employability skills as required by business and industry. The student is expected to:
express ideas in a clear, concise, and effective manner;
exhibit the ability to cooperate, contribute, and collaborate as a member of a team; and
identify employer expectations such as punctuality, attendance, time management, communication, organizational skills, and productive work habits.
The student recognizes the rights and choices of the individual. The student is expected to:
identify situations related to autonomy;
identify wellness strategies for the prevention of disease;
evaluate positive and negative effects of relationships on physical and emotional health such as peers, family, and friends in promoting a healthy community;
review documentation related to rights and choices; and
demonstrate an understanding of diversity and cultural practices influencing contemporary aspects of health care.
The student recognizes the importance of maintaining a safe environment and eliminating hazardous situations. The student is expected to:
identify governing regulatory agencies such as the World Health Organization, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Joint Commission, and National Institute of Health;
identify industry safety standards such as standard precautions, fire prevention and safety practices, and appropriate actions to emergency situations; and
relate safety practices in the health science industry.
The student identifies the technology used in the diagnostic, therapeutic, health informatics, support services, and biotechnology research and development systems. The student is expected to:
research and identify technological equipment used in the diagnostic, therapeutic, health informatics, support services, and biotechnology research and development systems;
identify potential malfunctions of technological equipment; and
recognize and explain the process for reporting equipment or technology malfunctions.
The student applies mathematics, science, English language arts, and social studies in health science. The student is expected to:
convert units between systems of measurement;
apply data from tables, charts, and graphs to provide solutions to health-related problems;
interpret technical material related to the health science industry;
organize, compile, and write ideas into reports and summaries;
plan and prepare effective oral presentations;
formulate responses using precise language to communicate ideas;
describe biological and chemical processes that maintain homeostasis;
identify and analyze principles of body mechanics and movement such as forces and the effects of movement, torque, tension, and elasticity on the human body;
identify human needs according to Maslow's Hierarchy of Human Needs;
describe the stages of development related to the life span;
identify the concepts of health and wellness throughout the life span;
analyze and evaluate communication skills for maintaining healthy relationships throughout the life span;
research the historical significance of health care;
describe the impact of health services on the economy;
analyze the impact of local, state, and national government on the health science industry;
identify diverse and cultural influences that have impacted contemporary aspects of health care delivery; and
research and compare practices used by various cultures and societies to solve problems related to health.
The student uses verbal and nonverbal communication skills. The student is expected to:
identify components of effective and non-effective communication;
demonstrate effective communication skills for responding to the needs of individuals in a diverse society;
evaluate the effectiveness of conflict-resolution techniques in various situations; and
accurately interpret, transcribe, and communicate medical vocabulary using appropriate technology.
The student implements the leadership skills necessary to function in a democratic society. The student is expected to:
identify traits of a leader;
demonstrate leadership skills, characteristics, and responsibilities of leaders such as goalsetting and team building; and
demonstrate the ability to effectively conduct and participate in meetings.
The student assesses career options and the preparation necessary for employment in the health science industry. The student is expected to:
locate, evaluate, and interpret career options and employment information; and
recognize the impact of career decisions, including the causes and effects of changing employment situations.
The student identifies academic preparation and skills necessary for employment as defined by the health science industry. The student is expected to identify academic requirements for professional advancement such as certification, licensure, registration, continuing education, and advanced degrees.
The student identifies the career pathways related to health science. The student is expected to:
compare health science careers within the diagnostic, therapeutic, health informatics, support services, and biotechnology research and development systems; and
identify the collaborative role of team members between systems to deliver quality health care.
The student examines the role of the multidisciplinary team in providing health care. The student is expected to:
explain the concept of teaming to provide quality health care; and
examine the role of professional organizations in the preparation and governance of credentialing and certification.
The student interprets ethical behavior standards and legal responsibilities. The student is expected to:
compare published professional codes of ethics and scope of practice;
explain principles of ethical behavior and confidentiality, including the consequences of breach of confidentiality;
discuss ethical issues related to health care, including implications of technological advances;
examine issues related to malpractice, negligence, and liability; and
research laws governing the health science industry.
